notes.md, before:

# Goal

The major goal of this set of experiments is to learn more about the following (in order of importance):

1. Large(ish) scale training include multi-step training (pre/mid/fine/RL) and observing how models abilities change as a function of their training
2. Engineering the LLM model to be somewhat interactive

# TODO

- Add CORE eval
- Understanding number of iterations from FLOPs

# Estimation of number of iterations

K suggests three methods of setting the number of iterations: (1) direct, (2) target FLOPS, (3) parameter to data ratio. Interestingly (according to Claude) the concept of epochs is not popular with these larger models so we'll ignore and only focus on iterations and assume the datasets are so large we don't get a chance to revisit.

1. Just set it based on vibes? IDK 10K?
2. If we assume a target number of FLOPS of 4e19, and a token requires 6 FLOPS x num_parameters (roughly 2 for forward pass, 4 for backwards pass, don't trust my numbers), and batch size = 524288 we get roughly 28K iterations.
3. Assume a optimal 20:1 (token:parameter) ratio, if our LLM has 524M parameters, that requires ~10B tokens. 

If batch size = 524288 we get 17.5K iterations. Given 1.7K shards, at roughly 53K rows of data that gives us ~100B GPT2 tokens available in training. For a model of 461M parameters we only need ~10% of this data. 

Further breaking down the training, we must understand the concept of multi-GPU. If we have 8XH100 GPUs with batch_size capability for the H100, we have 8 * batch_size which is good for (1) speed and (2) model quality. Next, remember that for a sequence, when it is passed into the tokenizer we always pad/truncate to a particular max_length = 2048. It is good to think of us thus having max_length x batch_size x num_gpu tokens per iteration. Furthermore, if we have gradient accumulation we squeeze out an additional x accumulation_steps of compute. 

So determining how many iterations we may run for sould probably start with (1) estimate of the optimal number of FLOPS using the 20:1 ratio followed by (2) refining that estimate based on your budget (where we can get $/FLOP based on the GPU and provider).

# Datasets and training

K uses 3 datasets for his example and 4 steps of training (let's ignore RL for now).

1. Pretrain on FineWeb-Edu: large, 14.5B tokens used in training, derived from common crawl, generally high quality websites and educational resources. Use causal language modeling loss function where logit from model predicts likleihood of next token given vocabulary. This is good for general understanding of grammar, facts, reasoning. 
2. Midtrain on FineWeb-Edu + SmolTalk Mix: medium, 5B tokens used in training at 70:30 split of FineWeb-Edu and SmolTalk (which uses Q:A conversations in coding, math, creative writing, advice, chitchat). Uses same loss function as pretraining. Mixing is useful to stop model from overfitting on new data (might lose world knowledge in favor of conversational knowledge).
3. SFT on SmolTalk: medium, 2-3B tokens of 100% SmolTalk, uses masked language modeling loss function to only generate the assistant response (the answer). 

Remember that attention masking is already used in training GPT-style models, so part (3) masking is more of a fine tune on particular tasks to only give reward to model for particular behavior.

# Getting started

Let's start understanding the datasets. In K's code the download process is kicked off using python -m nanochat.dataset -n num_shards so let's just copy that (this loads the pretraining data from Huggingface). Speaking of data, let's plan the overall size of the model. When starting, user should download the shards they need and store them as parquet files. I then went ahead and incorporated the major aspects of K's code into pytorch lightning because I find dealing with the multi-GPU process tedious. I have yet to scale up to the proper model size so it is unclear if the dataloaders have been implemented correctly but we will see. I also tried to use his distributed Muon optimizer with lightning but that required a full custom training step which I don't want to deal with quite yet. In it's place I had Claude extract out the underlying logic of the optimizer (basically splitting the LLM into slow and fast optimizations) and created a good baseline using AdamW. I am still trying to figure out how much we should abstract away from K's very low level implementation and still aline with Goal 2 above. I also managed to get a basic version of the model working at around 325M parameters with max_seq_len = 128. Next step is scaling up to the proper parameter size.

# Scaling up

One of the critical aspect of this study is to examine how to create large-scale ML experiments. With K's batch size of 32, token size of 2048, and ~400M parameter model, this is a small-scale LLM project but fairly large-scale project relative to the things I have done. Stealing K's dataloader allowed me to do this on 8 A40 GPUs (distribute samples according to rank, stream etc), and easily run experiments with fewer GPUs. Trying to simplify the dataloader to use a more classic pytorch dataloader resulted in OOM errors even at smaller batch sizes and smaller context length, so clearly the dataset is too large to hold in memory. I went on to keep closer track of VRAM during training using torch.cuda. After logging memory usage I realized allocated and reserved memory increase monotonically, indicating leakage somewhere (see image below).

[Figure 1](/images/fig1_badmemory.webp)

Helpful commands for RAM: du -h /workspace | sort -h | tail -20
Helpful scripts for VRAM: torch.cuda.memory_allocated(device), torch.cuda.memory_reserved(device)

I also had Claude rewrite the entire script, using the loading of parquet files as a starting point, and that seems to help (see below). 

[Figure 2](/images/fig2_goodmemory.png)

However, I am still running into an issue where, under certain conditions like various number of GPUs, the script itself starts but hangs. The issue seemed to resolve itself by running without P2P communication via the following:

NCCL_P2P_DISABLE=1 torchrun --nproc_per_node=X run_X.py

In further experiments, the VRAM memory issue, while resolved from a leakage perspective, still came up as the memory usage sits near the edge of OOM. So when certain validation steps pushed memory outside this bound the program fails. I find this odd for two reasons: (1) we are not keeping any artifacts of validation in memory and (2) the differences between validation steps in terms of memory is small. I removed the external validation steps as they required downloading artifacts, which may be held in memory in uncontrolled ways. Next I ran into a crash on one of the dataloader workers so I am setting num_workers = 0. This should increase stability. With these fixes I can get stable training with batch_size = 16 and max_seq_length = 2024/4, with lack of compute being the only thing holding us back. We are finally getting learning as the model goes from uniform random samples, to modal words (mostly "the" and "\n"), to modal sentence pieces ("United States", "from the") at ~500 iterations. I then switched from A40s to H100s and the speedup (maybe because the lack of multi-GPU communications when comparing 1XH100 vs 8XA40) was dramatic (~20x faster, ~33% lower cost). One issue is that I am using runpod.io service for GPU instances but I often cannot get H100s. I am now testing out moving to lambda.ai as they seem to have many more high quality GPUs.

# Creating a set for validation

The paradigm here is only having training and validation. We hold out a parquet file for validation. I had been using perplexity but I want to add some additional tests. I have started with a set of sentence completions that will be printed as well as some basic world knowledge compeltion tasks. This required adding a predict function to the model to make autoregressive temperature-normalized predictions until a max token limit. I also have started to add the rest of the ~1k parquet files to my machine which required increasing the storage size.

Commit message:

changed optimization to scale with world size

notes.md, after:

# Goal

The major goal of this set of experiments is to learn more about the following (in order of importance):

1. Large(ish) scale training include multi-step training (pre/mid/fine/RL) and observing how models abilities change as a function of their training
2. Engineering the LLM model to be somewhat interactive

# TODO

- Gradient accumulation
- Add CORE eval
- Understanding number of iterations from FLOPs

# Estimation of number of iterations

K suggests three methods of setting the number of iterations: (1) direct, (2) target FLOPS, (3) parameter to data ratio. Interestingly (according to Claude) the concept of epochs is not popular with these larger models so we'll ignore and only focus on iterations and assume the datasets are so large we don't get a chance to revisit.

1. Just set it based on vibes? IDK 10K?
2. If we assume a target number of FLOPS of 4e19, and a token requires 6 FLOPS x num_parameters (roughly 2 for forward pass, 4 for backwards pass, don't trust my numbers), and batch size = 524288 we get roughly 28K iterations.
3. Assume a optimal 20:1 (token:parameter) ratio, if our LLM has 524M parameters, that requires ~10B tokens. If batch size = 524288 we get 17.5K iterations. Given 1.7K shards, at roughly 53K rows of data that gives us ~100B GPT2 tokens available in training. For a model of 461M parameters we only need ~10% of this data. 

Further breaking down the training, we must understand the concept of multi-GPU. If we have 8XH100 GPUs with batch_size capability for the H100, we have 8 * batch_size which is good for (1) speed and (2) model quality. Next, remember that for a sequence, when it is passed into the tokenizer we always pad/truncate to a particular max_length = 2048. It is good to think of us thus having max_length x batch_size x num_gpu tokens per iteration. Furthermore, if we have gradient accumulation we squeeze out an additional x accumulation_steps of compute. 

So determining how many iterations we may run for sould probably start with (1) estimate of the optimal number of FLOPS using the 20:1 ratio followed by (2) refining that estimate based on your budget (where we can get $/FLOP based on the GPU and provider).

# Datasets and training

K uses 3 datasets for his example and 4 steps of training (let's ignore RL for now).

1. Pretrain on FineWeb-Edu: large, 14.5B tokens used in training, derived from common crawl, generally high quality websites and educational resources. Use causal language modeling loss function where logit from model predicts likleihood of next token given vocabulary. This is good for general understanding of grammar, facts, reasoning. 
2. Midtrain on FineWeb-Edu + SmolTalk Mix: medium, 5B tokens used in training at 70:30 split of FineWeb-Edu and SmolTalk (which uses Q:A conversations in coding, math, creative writing, advice, chitchat). Uses same loss function as pretraining. Mixing is useful to stop model from overfitting on new data (might lose world knowledge in favor of conversational knowledge).
3. SFT on SmolTalk: medium, 2-3B tokens of 100% SmolTalk, uses masked language modeling loss function to only generate the assistant response (the answer). 

Remember that attention masking is already used in training GPT-style models, so part (3) masking is more of a fine tune on particular tasks to only give reward to model for particular behavior.

# Getting started

Let's start understanding the datasets. In K's code the download process is kicked off using python -m nanochat.dataset -n num_shards so let's just copy that (this loads the pretraining data from Huggingface). Speaking of data, let's plan the overall size of the model. When starting, user should download the shards they need and store them as parquet files. I then went ahead and incorporated the major aspects of K's code into pytorch lightning because I find dealing with the multi-GPU process tedious. I have yet to scale up to the proper model size so it is unclear if the dataloaders have been implemented correctly but we will see. I also tried to use his distributed Muon optimizer with lightning but that required a full custom training step which I don't want to deal with quite yet. In it's place I had Claude extract out the underlying logic of the optimizer (basically splitting the LLM into slow and fast optimizations) and created a good baseline using AdamW. I am still trying to figure out how much we should abstract away from K's very low level implementation and still aline with Goal 2 above. I also managed to get a basic version of the model working at around 325M parameters with max_seq_len = 128. Next step is scaling up to the proper parameter size.

# Scaling up

One of the critical aspect of this study is to examine how to create large-scale ML experiments. With K's batch size of 32, token size of 2048, and ~400M parameter model, this is a small-scale LLM project but fairly large-scale project relative to the things I have done. Stealing K's dataloader allowed me to do this on 8 A40 GPUs (distribute samples according to rank, stream etc), and easily run experiments with fewer GPUs. Trying to simplify the dataloader to use a more classic pytorch dataloader resulted in OOM errors even at smaller batch sizes and smaller context length, so clearly the dataset is too large to hold in memory. I went on to keep closer track of VRAM during training using torch.cuda. After logging memory usage I realized allocated and reserved memory increase monotonically, indicating leakage somewhere (see image below).

[Figure 1](/images/fig1_badmemory.webp)

Helpful commands for RAM: du -h /workspace | sort -h | tail -20
Helpful scripts for VRAM: torch.cuda.memory_allocated(device), torch.cuda.memory_reserved(device)

I also had Claude rewrite the entire script, using the loading of parquet files as a starting point, and that seems to help (see below). 

[Figure 2](/images/fig2_goodmemory.png)

However, I am still running into an issue where, under certain conditions like various number of GPUs, the script itself starts but hangs. The issue seemed to resolve itself by running without P2P communication via the following:

NCCL_P2P_DISABLE=1 torchrun --nproc_per_node=X run_X.py

In further experiments, the VRAM memory issue, while resolved from a leakage perspective, still came up as the memory usage sits near the edge of OOM. So when certain validation steps pushed memory outside this bound the program fails. I find this odd for two reasons: (1) we are not keeping any artifacts of validation in memory and (2) the differences between validation steps in terms of memory is small. I removed the external validation steps as they required downloading artifacts, which may be held in memory in uncontrolled ways. Next I ran into a crash on one of the dataloader workers so I am setting num_workers = 0. This should increase stability. With these fixes I can get stable training with batch_size = 16 and max_seq_length = 2024/4, with lack of compute being the only thing holding us back. We are finally getting learning as the model goes from uniform random samples, to modal words (mostly "the" and "\n"), to modal sentence pieces ("United States", "from the") at ~500 iterations. I then switched from A40s to H100s and the speedup (maybe because the lack of multi-GPU communications when comparing 1XH100 vs 8XA40) was dramatic (~20x faster, ~33% lower cost). One issue is that I am using runpod.io service for GPU instances but I often cannot get H100s. I am now testing out moving to lambda.ai as they seem to have many more high quality GPUs.

# Re-estimate of the size/scope of project

After futher experiments, I find that I can use a context window of 2048 for my model and hold it in memory on an H200 GPU with batch_size 22 at ~2.35s/iteration. This is less than the 32 that K uses and I am still investigating this. Let's say I want to keep my model at ~500M parameters and reach the 1e19 FLOP threshhold, this will require ~10B tokens (or about 170 shards). Each iteration FLOP count can be calculated as (batch_size = 22) * (context = 2048) * (num_parameters = 500M) * (forward + backwards = 6) = 1e14. Thus, to get 1e19 FLOP total we need 1e5 (100,000) iterations. This will roughly take 65 hours. I tried to scale to 8XH100 but perhaps due to overhead issues I needed to reduce the batch_size to 18 to still get ~2.4s / iteration. This would then require ~15,000 iterations.

# Creating a set for validation

The paradigm here is only having training and validation. We hold out a parquet file for validation. I had been using perplexity but I want to add some additional tests. I have started with a set of sentence completions that will be printed as well as some basic world knowledge compeltion tasks. This required adding a predict function to the model to make autoregressive temperature-normalized predictions until a max token limit. I also have started to add the rest of the ~1k parquet files to my machine which required increasing the storage size.
